Felt it was just one algorithm worth knowing.
This is just a theoretical summary.

Picture this:
If you are a C programmer, you've requested the OS for some memmory allocation using malloc() to run some program but you forgot to free up the memory free().
Now, this is a huge problem as at some point you'll get an 'Out Of Memory' error. This is really frustrating, believe you me, I've spent countless hours debugging my basic C programs only to realise I forgot to give back the memory I had been allocated.

Lord knows this is one of the reasons I prefer higher-level languages 😅 as I don't have to worry about memory management.

This situation aroused my curiosity and I wanted to figure out how memory management works on languages such as Java and I ended up stumbling on Mark and Sweep.

MARK & SWEEP.
All garbage collection algorithms perform 2 basic tasks:
1.Detecting all unreachable objects.
2.Reclaim heap space used by the garbage objects and make the space available again to the program

The Mark & Sweep algo' as the name suggests performs this in 2 stages, guess which, Mark and Phase.
Mark Phase.
-When an object is created, its mark bit is set to 0(fasle).
-In this phase you set the marked bit for all the reachable objects to 1(true).
-And to implement it, you'll need to do a graph traversal where:
  consider every object as a node and then all nodes that are read from this node are visted and it goes on until all reachable nodes are visited.
  the root is a variable that refers to an object and is directly accessible by a local variable.
  you can therefore access the marked bit of an object by say 'mkedBit()'
  
Sweep Phase.
This phase clears the heap memory for all the unreachable objects.
All those objects whose marked value is set to false are cleared from the heap memory.

Advantages Of M&S.
1.No additional overheads incurred during execution of the algorithm.
2.Since it handles cases with cyclic references, even in the case of a cycle, it'll never enter into an infinite loop

Disadvantages Of M&S.
1.Normal program execution is suspended while the algorithm runs.



Nothing better than a visual aid innit😆:https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c32zXYAK7CI
But we kids don't use C anymore, Python, now that's where it's at 😎🤣.
